1917


A very cold winter's night, so silent that the air seemed frozen,
and, since there was no moon, congealed to the stillness of glass
spread over England.  Ponds and ditches were frozen; the puddles
made glazed eyes in the roads, and on the pavement the frost had
raised slippery knobs.  Darkness pressed on the windows; towns had
merged themselves in open country.  No light shone, save when a
searchlight rayed round the sky, and stopped, here and there, as if
to ponder some fleecy patch.



"If that is the river," said Eleanor, pausing in the dark street
outside the station, "Westminster must be there."  The omnibus in
which she had come, with its silent passengers looking cadaverous
in the blue light, had already vanished.  She turned.

She was dining with Renny and Maggie, who lived in one of the
obscure little streets under the shadow of the Abbey.  She walked
on.  The further side of the street was almost invisible.  The
lamps were shrouded in blue.  She flashed her torch onto a name on
a street corner.  Again she flashed her torch.  Here it lit up a
brick wall; there a dark green tuft of ivy.  At last the number
thirty, the number she was looking for, shone out.  She knocked and
rang at the same moment, for the darkness seemed to muffle sound as
well as sight.  Silence weighed on her as she stood there waiting.
Then the door opened and a man's voice said, "Come in!"

He shut the door behind him, quickly, as if to shut out the light.
It looked strange after the streets--the perambulator in the hall;
the umbrellas in the stand; the carpet, the pictures: they all
seemed intensified.

"Come in!" said Renny again, and led her into the sitting-room
ablaze with light.  Another man was standing in the room, and she
was surprised because she had expected to find them alone.  But the
man was somebody whom she did not know.

For a moment they stared at each other; then Renny said, "You know
Nicholas . . ." but he did not speak the surname distinctly, and it
was so long that she could not catch it.  A foreign name, she
thought.  A foreigner.  He was clearly not English.  He shook hands
with a bow like a foreigner, and he went on talking, as if he were
in the middle of a sentence that he wished to finish . . .  "we are
talking about Napoleon--" he said, turning to her.

"I see," she said.  But she had no notion what he was saying.  They
were in the middle of an argument, she supposed.  But it came to an
end without her understanding a word of it, except that it had to
do with Napoleon.  She took off her coat and laid it down.  They
stopped talking.

"I will go and tell Maggie," said Renny.  He left them abruptly.

"You were talking about Napoleon?" Eleanor said.  She looked at the
man whose surname she had not heard.  He was very dark; he had a
rounded head and dark eyes.  Did she like him or not?  She did not
know.

I've interrupted them, she felt, and I've nothing whatever to say.
She felt dazed and cold.  She spread her hands over the fire.  It
was a real fire; wood blocks were blazing; the flame ran along the
streaks of shiny tar.  A little trickle of feeble gas was all that
was left her at home.

"Napoleon," she said, warming her hands.  She spoke without any
meaning.

"We were considering the psychology of great men," he said, "by the
light of modern science," he added with a little laugh.  She wished
the argument had been more within her reach.

"That's very interesting," she said shyly.

"Yes--if we knew anything about it," he said.

"If we knew anything about it . . ." she repeated.  There was a
pause.  She felt numb all over--not only her hands, but her brain.

"The psychology of great men--" she said, for she did not wish him
to think her a fool, ". . .  was that what you were discussing?"

"We were saying--"  He paused.  She guessed that he found it
difficult to sum up their argument--they had evidently been talking
for some time, judging by the newspapers lying about and the
cigarette-ends on the table.

"I was saying," he went on, "I was saying we do not know ourselves,
ordinary people; and if we do not know ourselves, how then can we
make religions, laws, that--" he used his hands as people do who
find language obdurate, "that--"

"That fit--that fit," she said, supplying him with a word that was
shorter, she felt sure, than the dictionary word that foreigners
always used.

"--that fit, that fit," he said, taking the word and repeating it
as if he were grateful for her help.

". . . that fit," she repeated.  She had no idea what they were
talking about.  Then suddenly, as she bent to warm her hands over
the fire words floated together in her mind and made one
intelligible sentence.  It seemed to her that what he had said was,
"We cannot make laws and religions that fit because we do not know
ourselves."

"How odd that you should say that!" she said, smiling at him,
"because I've so often thought it myself!"

"Why is that odd?" he said.  "We all think the same things; only we
do not say them."

"Coming along in the omnibus tonight," she began, "I was thinking
about this war--I don't feel this, but other people do . . ."  She
stopped.  He looked puzzled; probably she had misunderstood what he
had said; she had not made her own meaning plain.

"I mean," she began again, "I was thinking as I came along in the
bus--"

But here Renny came in.

He was carrying a tray with bottles and glasses.

"It is a great thing," said Nicholas, "being the son of a wine
merchant."

It sounded like a quotation from the French grammar.

The son of the wine merchant, Eleanor repeated to herself, looking
at his red cheeks, dark eyes and large nose.  The other man must be
Russian, she thought.  Russian, Polish, Jewish?--she had no idea
what he was, who he was.

She drank; the wine seemed to caress a knob in her spine.  Here
Maggie came in.

"Good evening," she said, disregarding the foreigner's bow as if
she knew him too well to greet him.

"Papers," she protested, looking at the litter on the floor,
"papers, papers."  The floor was strewn with papers.

"We dine in the basement," she continued, turning to Eleanor,
"because we've no servants."  She led the way down the steep little
stairs.

"But Magdalena," said Nicholas, as they stood in the little low-
ceilinged room in which dinner was laid, "Sara said, 'We shall meet
tomorrow night at Maggie's . . .'  She is not here."

He stood; the others had sat down.

"She will come in time," said Maggie.

"I shall ring her up," said Nicholas.  He left the room.

"Isn't it much nicer," said Eleanor, taking her plate, "not having
servants . . ."

"We have a woman to do the washing-up," said Maggie.

"And we are extremely dirty," said Renny.

He took up a fork and examined it between the prongs.

"No, this fork, as it happens, is clean," he said, and put it down
again.

Nicholas came back into the room.  He looked perturbed.  "She is
not there," he said to Maggie.  "I rang her up, but I could get no
answer."

"Probably she's coming," said Maggie.  "Or she may have
forgotten. . . ."

She handed him his soup.  But he sat looking at his plate without
moving.  Wrinkles had come on his forehead; he made no attempt to
hide his anxiety.  He was without self-consciousness.  "There!" he
suddenly exclaimed, interrupting them as they talked.  "She is
coming!" he added.  He put down his spoon and waited.  Someone was
coming slowly down the steep stairs.

The door opened and Sara came in.  She looked pinched with the
cold.  Her cheeks were white here and red there, and she blinked as
if she were still dazed from her walk through the blue-shrouded
streets.  She gave her hand to Nicholas and he kissed it.  But she
wore no engagement ring, Eleanor observed.

"Yes, we are dirty," said Maggie, looking at her; she was in her
day clothes.  "In rags," she added, for a loop of gold thread hung
down from her own sleeve as she helped the soup.

"I was thinking how beautiful . . ." said Eleanor, for her eyes had
been resting on the silver dress with gold threads in it.  "Where
did you get it?"

"In Constantinople, from a Turk," said Maggie.

"A turbaned and fantastic Turk," Sara murmured, stroking the sleeve
as she took her plate.  She still seemed dazed.

"And the plates," said Eleanor, looking at the purple birds on her
plate, "Don't I remember them?" she asked.

"In the cabinet in the drawing-room at home," said Maggie.  "But it
seemed silly--keeping them in a cabinet."

"We break one every week," said Renny.

"They'll last the war," said Maggie.

Eleanor observed a curious mask-like expression come down over
Renny's face as she said "the war."  Like all the French, she
thought, he cares passionately for his country.  But contradictorily,
she felt, looking at him.  He was silent.  His silence oppressed
her.  There was something formidable about his silence.

"And why were you so late?" said Nicholas, turning to Sara.  He
spoke gently, reproachfully, rather as if she were a child.  He
poured her out a glass of wine.

Take care, Eleanor felt inclined to say to her; the wine goes to
one's head.  She had not drunk wine for months.  She was feeling
already a little blurred; a little light-headed.  It was the light
after the dark; talk after silence; the war, perhaps, removing
barriers.

But Sara drank.  Then she burst out:

"Because of that damned fool."

"Damned fool?" said Maggie.  "Which?"

"Eleanor's nephew," said Sara.  "North.  Eleanor's nephew, North."
She held her glass towards Eleanor, as if she were addressing her.
"North . . ."  Then she smiled.  "There I was, sitting alone.  The
bell rang.  'That's the wash,' I said.  Footsteps came up the
stairs.  There was North--North," she raised her hand to her head
as if in salute, "cutting a figure like this--'What the devil's
that for?' I asked.  'I leave for the Front tonight,' he said,
clicking his heels together.  'I'm a lieutenant in--' whatever it
was--Royal Regiment of Rat-catchers or something. . . .  And he
hung his cap on the bust of our grandfather.  And I poured out tea.
'How many lumps of sugar does a lieutenant in the Royal Rat-
catchers require?' I asked.  'One.  Two.  Three.  Four. . . .'"

She dropped pellets of bread on to the table.  As each fell, it
seemed to emphasise her bitterness.  She looked older, more worn;
though she laughed, she was bitter.

"Who is North?" Nicholas asked.  He pronounced the word "North" as
if it were a point on the compass.

"My nephew.  My brother Morris's son," Eleanor explained.

"There he sat," Sara resumed, "in his mud-coloured uniform, with
his switch between his legs, and his ears sticking out on either
side of his pink, foolish face, and whatever I said, 'Good,' he
said, 'Good,' 'Good,' until I took up the poker and tongs"--she
took up her knife and fork--"and played 'God save the King, Happy
and Glorious, Long to reign over us--'"  She held her knife and
fork as if they were weapons.

I'm sorry he's gone, Eleanor thought.  A picture came before her
eyes--the picture of a nice cricketing boy smoking a cigar on a
terrace.  I'm sorry. . . .  Then another picture formed.  She was
sitting on the same terrace; but now the sun was setting; a maid
came out and said, "The soldiers are guarding the line with fixed
bayonets!"  That was how she had heard of the war--three years
ago.  And she had thought, putting down her coffee-cup on a little
table, Not if I can help it! overcome by an absurd but vehement
desire to protect those hills; she had looked at the hills across
the meadow. . . .  Now she looked at the foreigner opposite.

"How unfair you are," Nicholas was saying to Sara.  "Prejudiced;
narrow; unfair," he repeated, tapping her hand with his finger.

He was saying what Eleanor felt herself.

"Yes.  Isn't it natural . . ." she began.  "Could you allow the
Germans to invade England and do nothing?" she said, turning to
Renny.  She was sorry she had spoken; and the words were not the
ones she had meant to use.  There was an expression of suffering,
or was it anger? on his face.

"I?" he said.  "I help them to make shells."

Maggie stood behind him.  She had brought in the meat.  "Carve,"
she said.  He was staring at the meat which she had put down in
front of him.  He took up the knife and began to carve mechanically.

"Now, Nurse," she reminded him.  He cut another helping.

"Yes," said Eleanor awkwardly as Maggie took away the plate.  She
did not know what to say.  She spoke without thinking.  "Let's end
it as quickly as possible and then . . ."  She looked at him.  He
was silent.  He turned away.  He had turned to listen to what the
others were saying, as if to take refuge from speaking himself.

"Poppycock, poppycock . . . don't talk such damned poppycock--
that's what you really said," Nicholas was saying.  His hands were
large and clean and the finger-nails were trimmed very close,
Eleanor noticed.  He might be a doctor, she thought.

"What's 'poppy-cock'?" she asked, turning to Renny.  For she did
not know the word.

"American," said Renny.  "He's an American," he said, nodding at
Nicholas.

"No," said Nicholas, turning round, "I am a Pole."

"His mother was a Princess," said Maggie as if she were teasing
him.  That explains the seal on his chain, Eleanor thought.  He
wore a large old seal on his chain.

"She was," he said quite seriously.  "One of the noblest families
in Poland.  But my father was an ordinary man--a man of the
people. . . .  You should have had more self-control," he added,
turning again to Sara.

"So I should," she sighed.  "But then he gave his bridle reins a
shake and said, 'Adieu for evermore, adieu for evermore!'"  She
stretched out her hand and poured herself another glass of wine.

"You shall have no more to drink," said Nicholas, moving away the
bottle.  "She saw herself," he explained, turning to Eleanor, "on
top of a tower, waving a white handkerchief to a knight in armour."

"And the moon was rising over a dark moor," Sara murmured, touching
a pepper-pot.

The pepper-pot's a dark moor, Eleanor thought, looking at it.  A
little blur had come round the edges of things.  It was the wine;
it was the war.  Things seemed to have lost their skins; to be
freed from some surface hardness; even the chair with gilt claws,
at which she was looking, seemed porous; it seemed to radiate out
some warmth, some glamour, as she looked at it.

"I remember that chair," she said to Maggie.  "And your mother . . ."
she added.  But she always saw Eug�nie not sitting but in
movement.

". . . dancing," she added.

"Dancing . . ." Sara repeated.  She began drumming on the table
with her fork.

"When I was young, I used to dance," she hummed.

"All men loved me when I was young. . . .  Roses and syringas hung,
when I was young, when I was young.  D'you remember, Maggie?"  She
looked at her sister as if they both remembered the same thing.

Maggie nodded.  "In the bedroom.  A waltz," she said.

"A waltz . . ." said Eleanor.  Sara was drumming a waltz rhythm on
the table.  Eleanor began to hum in time to it:  "Hoity te, toity
te, hoity te. . . ."

A long-drawn hollow sound wailed out.

"No, no!" she protested, as if somebody had given her the wrong
note.  But the sound wailed again.

"A fog-horn?" she said.  "On the river?"

But as she said it she knew what it was.

The siren wailed again.

"The Germans!" said Renny.  "Those damned Germans!"  He put down
his knife and fork with an exaggerated gesture of boredom.

"Another raid," said Maggie, getting up.  She left the room; Renny
followed her.



"The Germans . . ." said Eleanor as the door shut.  She felt as if
some dull bore had interrupted an interesting conversation.  The
colours began to fade.  She had been looking at the red chair.  It
lost its radiance as she looked at it, as if a light had been
extinguished underneath.

They heard the rush of wheels in the street.  Everything seemed to
be going past very quickly.  There was the round of feet tapping on
the pavement.  Eleanor got up and drew the curtains slightly apart.
The basement was sunk beneath the pavement, so that she only saw
people's legs and skirts as they went past the area railings.  Two
men came by walking very quickly; then an old woman, with her skirt
swinging from side to side, walked past.

"Oughtn't we to ask people in?" she said, turning round.  But when
she looked back the old woman had disappeared.  So had the men.
The street was now quite empty.  The houses opposite were
completely curtained.  She drew their own curtain carefully.  The
table, with the gay china and the lamp, seemed ringed in a circle
of bright light as she turned back.

She sat down again.  "D'you mind air raids?" Nicholas asked,
looking at her with his inquisitive expression.  "People differ so
much."

"Not at all," she said.  She would have crumbled a piece of bread
to show him that she was at her ease; but as she was not afraid,
the action seemed to her unnecessary.

"The chances of being hit oneself are so small," she said.  "What
were we saying?" she added.

It seemed to her that they had been saying something extremely
interesting; but she could not remember what.  They sat silent for
a moment.  Then they heard a shuffling on the stairs.

"The children . . ." said Sara.  They heard the dull boom of a gun
in the distance.

Here Renny came in.

"Bring your plates," he said.

"In here."  He led them into the cellar.  It was a large cellar.
With its crypt-like ceiling and stone walls it had a damp
ecclesiastical look.  It was used partly for coal, partly for wine.
The light in the centre shone on glittering heaps of coal; bottles
of wine wrapped in straw lay on their sides on stone shelves.
There was a mouldy smell of wine, straw and damp.  It was chilly
after the dining-room.  Sara came in carrying quilts and dressing-
gowns which she had fetched from upstairs.  Eleanor was glad to
wrap herself in a blue dressing-gown; she wrapped it round her and
sat holding her plate on her knees.  It was cold.

"And now?" said Sara, holding her spoon erect.

They all looked as if they were waiting for something to happen.
Maggie came in carrying a plum pudding.

"We may as well finish our dinner," she said.  But she spoke too
sensibly; she was anxious about the children, Eleanor guessed.
They were in the kitchen.  She had seen them as she passed.

"Are they asleep?" she asked.

"Yes.  But if the guns . . ." she began, helping the pudding.
Another gun boomed out.  This time it was distinctly louder.

"They've got through the defences," said Nicholas.

They began to eat their pudding.

A gun boomed again.  This time there was a bark in its boom.

"Hampstead," said Nicholas.  He took out his watch.  The silence
was profound.  Nothing happened.  Eleanor looked at the blocks of
stone arched over their heads.  She noticed a spider's web in one
corner.  Another gun boomed.  A sigh of air rushed up with it.  It
was right on top of them this time.

"The Embankment," said Nicholas.  Maggie put down her plate and
went into the kitchen.

There was profound silence.  Nothing happened.  Nicholas looked at
his watch as if he were timing the guns.  There was something queer
about him, Eleanor thought; medical, priestly?  He wore a seal that
hung down from his watch-chain.  The number on the box opposite was
1397.  She noticed everything.  The Germans must be overhead now.
She felt a curious heaviness on top of her head.  One, two, three,
four, she counted, looking up at the greenish-grey stone.  Then
there was a violent crack of sound, like the split of lightning in
the sky.  The spider's web oscillated.

"On top of us," said Nicholas, looking up.  They all looked up.  At
any moment a bomb might fall.  There was dead silence.  In the
silence they heard Maggie's voice in the kitchen.

"That was nothing.  Turn round and go to sleep."  She spoke very
calmly and soothingly.

One, two, three four, Eleanor counted.  The spider's web was
swaying.  That stone may fall, she thought, fixing a certain stone
with her eyes.  Then a gun boomed again.  It was fainter--further
away.

"That's over," said Nicholas.  He shut his watch with a click.  And
they all turned and shifted on their hard chairs as if they had
been cramped.



Maggie came in.

"Well, that's over," she said.  ("He woke for a moment, but he went
off to sleep again," she said in an undertone to Renny, "but the
baby slept right through.")  She sat down and took the plate that
Renny was holding for her.

"Now let's finish our pudding," she said, speaking in her natural
voice.

"Now we will have some wine," said Renny.  He examined one bottle;
then another; finally he took a third and wiped it carefully with
the tail of his dressing-gown.  He placed the bottle on a wooden
case and they sat round in a circle.

"It didn't come to much, did it?" said Sara.  She was tilting back
her chair as she held out her glass.

"Ah, but we were frightened," said Nicholas.  "Look--how pale we
all are."

They looked at each other.  Draped in their quilts and dressing-
gowns, against the grey-green walls, they all looked whitish,
greenish.

"It's partly the light," said Maggie.  "Eleanor," she said, looking
at her, "looks like an abbess."

The deep-blue dressing-gown which hid the foolish little ornaments,
the tabs of velvet and lace on her dress, had improved her
appearance.  Her middle-aged face was crinkled like an old glove
that has been creased into a multitude of fine lines by the
gestures of a hand.

"Untidy, am I?" she said, putting her hand to her hair.

"No.  Don't touch it," said Maggie.

"And what were we talking about before the raid?" Eleanor asked.
Again she felt that they had been in the middle of saying something
very interesting when they were interrupted.  But there had been a
complete break; none of them could remember what they had been
saying.

"Well, it's over now," said Sara.  "So let's drink a health--Here's
to the New World!" she exclaimed.  She raised her glass with a
flourish.  They all felt a sudden desire to talk and laugh.

"Here's to the New World!" they all cried, raising their glasses,
and clinking them together.

The five glasses filled with yellow liquid came together in a
bunch.

"To the New World!" they cried and drank.  The yellow liquid swayed
up and down in their glasses.

"Now, Nicholas," said Sara, setting her glass down with a tap on
the box, "a speech!  A speech!"

"Ladies and gentlemen!" he began, flinging his hand out like an
orator.  "Ladies and gentlemen . . ."

"We don't want speeches," Renny interrupted him.

Eleanor was disappointed.  She would have liked a speech.  But he
seemed to take the interruption good-humouredly; he sat there
nodding and smiling.

"Let's go upstairs," said Renny, pushing away the box.

"And leave this cellar," said Sara, stretching her arms out, "this
cave of mud and dung. . . ."

"Listen!" Maggie interrupted.  She held up her hand.  "I thought I
heard the guns again. . . ."

They listened.  The guns were still firing, but far away in the
distance.  There was a sound like the breaking of waves on a shore
far away.

"They're only killing other people," said Renny savagely.  He
kicked the wooden box.

"But you must let us think of something else," Eleanor protested.
The mask had come down over his face.

"And what nonsense, what nonsense Renny talks," said Nicholas,
turning to her privately.  "Only children letting off fireworks in
the back garden," he muttered as he helped her out of her dressing-
gown.  They went upstairs.



Eleanor came into the drawing-room.  It looked larger than she
remembered it, and very spacious and comfortable.  Papers were
strewn on the floor; the fire was burning brightly; it was warm; it
was cheerful.  She felt very tired.  She sank down into an
armchair.  Sara and Nicholas had lagged behind.  The others were
helping the nurse to carry the children up to bed, she supposed.
She lay back in the chair.  Everything seemed to become quiet and
natural again.  A feeling of great calm possessed her.  It was as
if another space of time had been issued to her, but, robbed by the
presence of death of something personal, she felt--she hesitated
for a word; "immune?"  Was that what she meant?  Immune, she said,
looking at a picture without seeing it.  Immune, she repeated.  It
was a picture of a hill and a village perhaps in the South of
France; perhaps in Italy.  There were olive trees; and white roofs
grouped against a hillside.  Immune, she repeated, looking at the
picture.

She could hear a gentle thudding on the floor above; Maggie and
Renny were settling the children into their beds again, she
supposed.  There was a little squeak, like a sleepy bird chirping
in its nest.  It was very private and peaceful after the guns.  But
here the others came in.

"Did they mind it?" she said, sitting up, "--the children?"

"No," said Maggie.  "They slept through it."

"But they may have dreamt," said Sara, pulling up a chair.  Nobody
spoke.  It was very quiet.  The clocks that used to boom out the
hour in Westminster were silent.

Maggie took the poker and struck the wood blocks.  The sparks went
volleying up the chimney in a shower of gold eyes.

"How that makes me . . ." Eleanor began.

She stopped.

"Yes?" said Nicholas.

". . . think of my childhood," she added.

She was thinking of Morris and herself, and old Pippy; but had she
told them nobody would know what she meant.  They were silent.
Suddenly a clear flute-like note rang out in the street below.

"What's that?" said Maggie.  She started; she looked at the window;
she half rose.

"The bugles," said Renny, putting out his hand to stop her.

The bugles blew again beneath the window.  Then they heard them
further down the street; then further away still down the next
street.  Almost directly the hooting of cars began again, and the
rushing of wheels as if the traffic had been released and the usual
night life of London had begun again.

"It's over," said Maggie.  She lay back in her chair; she looked
very tired for a moment.  Then she pulled a basket towards her and
began to darn a sock.

"I'm glad I'm alive," said Eleanor.  "Is that wrong, Renny?" she
asked.  She wanted him to speak.  It seemed to her that he hoarded
immense supplies of emotion that he could not express.  He did not
answer.  He was leaning on his elbow, smoking a cigar and looking
into the fire.

"I have spent the evening sitting in a coal cellar while other
people try to kill each other above my head," he said suddenly.
Then he stretched out and took up a paper.

"Renny, Renny, Renny," said Nicholas, as if he were expostulating
with a naughty child.  He went on reading.  The rush of wheels and
the hooting of motor cars had run themselves into one continuous
sound.

As Renny was reading and Maggie was darning there was silence in
the room.  Eleanor watched the fire run along veins of tar and
blaze and sink.

"What are you thinking, Eleanor?" Nicholas interrupted her.  He
calls me Eleanor, she thought; that's right.

"About the new world . . ." she said aloud.  "D'you think we're
going to improve?" she asked.

"Yes, yes," he said, nodding his head.

He spoke quietly as if he did not wish to rouse Renny who was
reading, or Maggie who was darning, or Sara who was lying back in
her chair half asleep.  They seemed to be talking, privately,
together.

"But how. . ." she began, "--how can we improve ourselves . . .
live more. . ."--she dropped her voice as if she were afraid of
waking sleepers--". . . live more naturally . . . better . . .  How
can we?"

"It is only a question," he said--he stopped.  He drew himself
close to her--"of learning.  The soul . . ."  Again he stopped.

"Yes--the soul?" she prompted him.

"The soul--the whole being," he explained.  He hollowed his hands
as if to enclose a circle.  "It wishes to expand; to adventure; to
form--new combinations?"

"Yes, yes," she said, as if to assure him that his words were
right.

"Whereas now,"--he drew himself together; put his feet together; he
looked like an old lady who is afraid of mice--"this is how we
live, screwed up into one hard little, tight little--knot?"

"Knot, knot--yes, that's right," she nodded.

"Each is his own little cubicle; each with his own cross or holy
book; each with his fire, his wife . . ."

"Darning socks," Maggie interrupted.

Eleanor started.  She had seemed to be looking into the future.
But they had been overheard.  Their privacy was ended.

Renny threw down his paper.  "It's all damned rot!" he said.
Whether he referred to the paper, or to what they were saying,
Eleanor did not know.  But talk in private was impossible.

"Why d'you buy them then?" she said, pointing to the papers.

"To light fires with," said Renny.

Maggie laughed and threw down the sock she was mending.  "There!"
she exclaimed.  "Mended. . . ."

Again they sat silent, looking at the fire.  Eleanor wished that he
would go on talking--the man she called Nicholas.  When, she wanted
to ask him, when will this new world come?  When shall we be free?
When shall we live adventurously, wholly, not like cripples in a
cave?  He seemed to have released something in her; she felt not
only a new space of time, but new powers, something unknown within
her.  She watched his cigarette moving up and down.  Then Maggie
took the poker and struck the wood and again a shower of red-eyed
sparks went volleying up the chimney.  We shall be free, we shall
be free, Eleanor thought.

"And what have you been thinking all this time?" said Nicholas,
laying his hand on Sara's knee.  She started.  "Or have you been
asleep?" he added.

"I heard what you were saying," she said.

"What were we saying?" he asked.

"The soul flying upwards like sparks up the chimney," she said.
The sparks were flying up the chimney.

"Not such a bad shot," said Nicholas.

"Because people always say the same thing," she laughed.  She
roused herself and sat up.  "There's Maggie--she says nothing.
There's Renny--he says 'What damned rot!'  Eleanor says 'That's
just what I was thinking.' . . .  And Nicholas, Nicholas,"--she
patted him on the knee--"who ought to be in prison, says, 'Oh, my
dear friends, let us improve the soul!'"

"Ought to be in prison?" said Eleanor, looking at him.

"Because he loves," Sara explained.  She paused.  "--the other sex,
the other sex, you see," she said lightly, waving her hand in the
way that was so like her mother's.

For a second a sharp shiver of repugnance passed over Eleanor's
skin as if a knife had sliced it.  Then she realised that it
touched nothing of importance.  The sharp shiver passed.
Underneath was--what?  She looked at Nicholas.  He was watching
her.

"Does that," he said, hesitating a little, "make you dislike me,
Eleanor?"

"Not in the least!  Not in the least!" she exclaimed spontaneously.
All the evening, off and on, she had been feeling about him; this,
that, and the other; but now all the feelings came together and
made one feeling, one whole--liking.  "Not in the least," she said
again.  He gave her a little bow.  She returned it with a little
bow.  But the clock on the mantelpiece was striking.  Renny was
yawning.  It was late.  She got up.  She went to the window and
parted the curtains and looked out.  All the houses were still
curtained.  The cold winter's night was almost black.  It was like
looking into the hollow of a dark-blue stone.  Here and there a
star pierced the blue.  She had a sense of immensity and peace--as
if something had been consumed. . . .

"Shall I get you a cab?" Renny interrupted.

"No, I'll walk," she said, turning.  "I like walking in London."

"We will come with you," said Nicholas.  "Come, Sara," he said.
She was lying back in her chair swinging her foot up and down.

"But I don't want to come," she said, waving him away.  "I want to
stay; I want to talk; I want to sing--a hymn of praise--a song of
thanksgiving. . . ."

"Here is your hat; here is your bag," said Nicholas, giving them to
her.

"Come," he said, taking her by the shoulder and pushing her out of
the room.  "Come."

Eleanor went up to say good-night to Maggie.

"I should like to stay too," she said.  "There are so many things I
should like to talk about--"

"But I want to go to bed--I want to go to bed," Renny protested.
He stood there with his hands stretched above his head, yawning.

Maggie rose.  "So you shall," she laughed at him.

"Don't bother to come downstairs," Eleanor protested as he opened
the door for her.  But he insisted.  He is very rude and at the
same time very polite, she thought, as she followed him down the
stairs.  A man who feels many different things, and all
passionately, all at the same time, she thought. . . .  But they
had reached the hall.  Nicholas and Sara were standing there.

"Cease to laugh at me for once, Sara," Nicholas was saying as he
put on his coat.

"And cease to lecture me," she said, opening the front door.

Renny smiled at Eleanor as they stood for a moment by the
perambulator.

"Educating themselves!" he said.

"Good-night," she said, smiling as she shook hands.  That is the
man, she said to herself, with a sudden rush of conviction, as she
came out into the frosty air, that I should like to have married.
She recognised a feeling which she had never felt.  But he's twenty
years younger than I am, she thought, and married to my cousin.
For a moment she resented the passage of time and the accidents of
life which had swept her away--from all that, she said to herself.
And a scene came before her; Maggie and Renny sitting over the
fire.  A happy marriage, she thought, that's what I was feeling all
the time.  A happy marriage.  She looked up as she walked down the
dark little street behind the others.  A broad fan of light, like
the sail of a windmill, was sweeping slowly across the sky.  It
seemed to take what she was feeling and to express it broadly and
simply, as if another voice were speaking in another language.
Then the light stopped and examined a fleecy patch of sky, a
suspected spot.

The raid! she said to herself.  I'd forgotten the raid!

The others had come to the crossing; there they stood.

"I'd forgotten the raid!" she said aloud as she came up with them.
She was surprised; but it was true.

They were in Victoria Street.  The street curved away, looking
wider and darker than usual.  Little figures were hurrying along
the pavement; they emerged for a moment under a lamp, then vanished
into darkness again.  The street was very empty.

"Will the omnibuses be running as usual?" Eleanor asked as they
stood there.

They looked round them.  Nothing was coming along the street at the
moment.

"I shall wait here," said Eleanor.

"Then I shall go," said Sara abruptly.  "Goodnight!"

She waved her hand and walked away.  Eleanor took it for granted
that Nicholas would go with her.

"I shall wait here," she repeated.

But he did not move.  Sara had already vanished.  Eleanor looked at
him.  Was he angry?  Was he unhappy?  She did not know.  But here a
great form loomed up through the darkness; its lights were shrouded
with blue paint.  Inside silent people sat huddled up; they looked
cadaverous and unreal in the blue light.  "Good-night," she said,
shaking hands with Nicholas.  She looked back and saw him still
standing on the pavement.  He still held his hat in his hand.  He
looked tall, impressive and solitary standing there alone, while
the searchlights wheeled across the sky.



The omnibus moved on.  She found herself staring at an old man in
the corner who was eating something out of a paper bag.  He looked
up and caught her staring at him.

"Like to see what I've got for supper, lady?" he said, cocking one
eyebrow over his rheumy, twinkling old eyes.  And he held out for
her inspection a hunk of bread on which was laid a slice of cold
meat or sausage.